editorialize serialization section (#289)
quicwg/qlog: draft-ietf-quic-qlog-main-schema.md

# Serializing qlog {#concrete-formats}

> qlog schema definitions in this document, {{QLOG-QUIC}} and {{QLOG-H3}} are

Author: Right but it's too wooly to say "other related schema" - all extensions of qlog are related to the main schema. So the question becomes are we levying recommendations on additional schema to be generic, or can they make optimization for serialization formats? The latter seems reasonable to me, it's part of tradeoff that we mention in this spec.

 We have two examples that are generic but don't think we can extapolate from that. This might lean towards having a serialization section in each of the documents so that they state if they are generic or specific. I created #357 to track that.

intentionally agnostic to serialization formats. The choice of format is an
implementation decision. Some examples of possible formats are JSON, CBOR, CSV,
protocol buffers, flatbuffers, etc.

Serialization formats make certain tradeoffs between usability, flexibility,
interoperability, and efficiency. Implementations should take these into
consideration when choosing a format. For instance, a textual formats like JSON
can be more flexible than a binary format but more verbose, typically making it
less efficient than a binary format. A plaintext readable (yet relatively large)
format like JSON is potentially more usable for users operating on the logs
directly, while a more optimized yet restricted format can better suit the
constraints of a large scale operation. A custom or restricted format could be
more efficient for analysis with custom tooling but might not be interoperable
with general-purpose qlog tools.

Considering these tradeoffs, JSON-based serialization formats provide features
that make them a good starting point for qlog flexibility and interoperability.
For these reasons, JSON is a recommended default and expanded considerations are

> given to how to map qlog to JSON ({{format-json}}, its subset

Author: given to is more proper, innit

{{format-ijson}},and JSON-Text-Sequence ({{format-json-seq}}. Furthermore,
potential optimizations to these formats, such as reducing storage or processing
overheads, are presented in {{optimizations}}.

Serialization formats require appropriate deserializers/parsers. The
"qlog_format" field ({{top-level}} is used to indicate the chosen serialization
format. This field is a string, but can be made hierarchical by the use of the
"." separator between entries. For example, a value of "JSON.optimizationA" can
indicate that a default JSON format is being used, with an example "type A"
optimization; see also {{optimizations}}.

## qlog to JSON mapping {#format-json}

As described in {{top-level}}, JSON is the default qlog serialization. When
mapping qlog to normal JSON, QlogFile ({{qlog-file-def}}) is used and the
"qlog_format" field MUST have the value "JSON". The file extension/suffix SHOULD
be ".qlog". The Media Type, if any, SHOULD be "application/qlog+json" per
{{!RFC6839}}.

In accordance with {{Section 8.1 of !RFC8259}}, JSON files are required to use
use UTF-8 both for the file itself and the string values. In addition, all qlog

> field names in a JSON serialization MUST be lowercase.

Author: Spun off to #339

In order to serialize CDDL-based qlog event and data structure
definitions to JSON, the official CDDL-to-JSON mapping defined in
{{Appendix E of CDDL}} SHOULD be employed.

> ### I-JSON {#format-ijson}

Author: Spun off to #339

> ### I-JSON {#format-ijson}

Author: Opened #340

JSON format called JSON Text Sequences (JSON-SEQ) ({{!RFC7464}}) is provided.

JSON Text Sequences are very similar to JSON, except that JSON objects are
serialized as individual records, each prefixed by an ASCII Record Separator
(\<RS\>, 0x1E), and each ending with an ASCII Line Feed character (\n, 0x0A). Note
that each record can also contain any amount of newlines in its body, as long as
it ends with a newline character before the next \<RS\> character.

In order to leverage the streaming capability, each qlog event is serialized and
interpreted as an individual JSON Text Sequence record, that is appended as a
new object to the back of an event stream or log file. Put differently, unlike
default JSON, it does not require a document to be wrapped as a full object with
"{ ... }" or "\[... \]".

This alternative record streaming approach cannot be accommodated by QlogFile
({{qlog-file-def}}). Instead, QlogFileSeq is defined in {{qlog-file-seq-def}},
which notably includes only a single trace (TraceSeq) and omits an explicit
events field. An example is provided in {{json-seq-ex}}.

When mapping qlog to JSON-SEQ, the "qlog_format" field MUST have the value

> "JSON-SEQ". Rhe file extension/suffix SHOULD be ".sqlog" (for "streaming" qlog).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
"JSON-SEQ". The file extension/suffix SHOULD be ".sqlog" (for "streaming" qlog).
```

The Media Type, if any, SHOULD be "application/qlog+json-seq" per {{!RFC8091}}.

While not specifically required by the JSON-SEQ specification, all qlog
field names in a JSON-SEQ serialization MUST be lowercase.

In order to serialize all other CDDL-based qlog event and data structure
definitions to JSON-SEQ, the official CDDL-to-JSON mapping defined in
{{Appendix E of CDDL}} SHOULD be employed.

> Note that the "group_id" field can still be used on a per-event basis to include

Reviewer: Imo this should be moved up to right after the Trace vs TraceSeq discussion (line 1400 above, "which notably includes only a single trace (TraceSeq) and omits an explicit events field")

into its component records and feeding them to a normal JSON parser individually,
as each record by itself is a valid JSON object).

## Truncated values {#truncated-values}

For some use cases (e.g., limiting file size, privacy), it can be
necessary not to log a full raw blob (using the `hexstring` type) but

> instead a truncated value (for example, only the first 100 bytes of an
> HTTP response body to be able to discern which file it actually
> contained). In these cases, the original byte-size length cannot be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
instead a truncated value. For example, one might only store the first 100 bytes of an
HTTP response body to be able to discern which file it actually
contained. In these cases, the original byte-size length cannot be
```

obtained from the serialized value directly.

As such, all qlog schema definitions SHOULD include a separate,
length-indicating field for all fields of type `hexstring` they specify,
see for example {{raw-info}}. This not only ensures the original length
can always be retrieved, but also allows the omission of any raw value
bytes of the field completely (e.g., out of privacy or security
considerations).

To reduce overhead however and in the case the full raw value is logged,
the extra length-indicating field can be left out. As such, tools MUST
be able to deal with this situation and derive the length of the field
from the raw value if no separate length-indicating field is present.
The main possible permutations are shown by example in
{{truncated-values-ex}}.

> ~~~~~~~~
> // both the full raw value and its length are present
> // (length is redundant)
> {
>     "raw_length": 5,
>     "raw": "051428abff"
> }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
~~~~~~~~
// both the content's value and its length are present
// (length is redundant)
{
    "content_length": 5,
    "content": "051428abff"
}
```

> // only the raw value is present, indicating it
> // represents the fields full value the byte
> // length is obtained by calculating raw.length / 2
> {
>     "raw": "051428abff"
> }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// only the content value is present, indicating it
// represents the content's full value. The byte
// length is obtained by calculating content.length / 2
{
    "content": "051428abff"
}
```

> // only the length field is present, meaning the
> // value was omitted
> {
>     "raw_length": 5,
> }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// only the length is present, meaning the value
// was omitted
{
    "content_length": 5,
}
```

> // both fields are present and the lengths do not match:
> // the value was truncated to the first three bytes.
> {
>     "raw_length": 5,
>     "raw": "051428"
> }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// both value and length are present, but the lengths 
// do not match: the value was truncated to 
// the first three bytes.
{
    "content_length": 5,
    "content": "051428"
}
```

~~~~~~~~
{: #truncated-values-ex title="Example for serializing truncated
hexstrings"}

## Optimization of serialized data {#optimizations}

Both the JSON and JSON-SEQ formatting options described above are serviceable in
general small to medium scale (debugging) setups. However, these approaches tend
to be relatively verbose, leading to larger file sizes. Additionally, generalized
JSON(-SEQ) (de)serialization performance is typically (slightly) lower than that
of more optimized and predictable formats. Both aspects present challenges to
large scale setups, though they may still be practical to deploy; see [ANRW-2020].

During the development of qlog, a multitude of alternative formatting
and optimization options were assessed and the results are [summarized on the qlog
github
repository](https://github.com/quiclog/internet-drafts/issues/30#issuecomment-617675097).

Formal definition of additional qlog formats or encodings that use the
optimization techniques described here, or any other optimization technique is
left to future activity that can apply the following guidelines.

> It is important that tooling can correctly parse and process serialized qlog. It

Reviewer: This first sentence seems a bit... obvious. Did this get lost in "translation"? What are we actually trying to say? Process serialized JSON / I-JSON / JSON-SEQ qlog?

Author: fixed!

is RECOMMENDED that new formats also define suitable file extensions and media types. This provides a clear signal and avoids the need to provide out-of-band information or to rely on heuristic fallbacks; see {{tooling}}.

There is no established standard for indicating optimized formats. Therefore, it
is RECOMMENDED that applied optimizations are expressed in ascending order of
application. For example, if a qlog file using JSON is first optimized with
technique A and then compressed with technique B, the resulting file would have
the extension ".qlog.A.B". This allows tooling reverse the applied optimizations
to arrive at the expected qlog representation. This recommendation applies to

> both file extensions and media types.

Reviewer: I really wonder if we should keep this kind of thing in here, especially if we don't include any concrete examples anymore. Then we should also remove a similar paragraph up-top when discussing `qlog_format` for the first time.

Author: Happy to do that but let's track in a followup issue. Created #341

  usage (#26,#33,#51)
* Overall tightened up the text and added more examples

## Since draft-marx-qlog-main-schema-00:

* All field names are now lowercase (e.g., category instead of CATEGORY)
* Triggers are now properties on the "data" field value, instead of separate field
  types (#23)
* group_ids in common_fields is now just also group_id

# Survey of serialization optimizations {#optimization-survey}

> ## Data structure optimizations {#structure-optimizations}

Reviewer: I feel this one can be removed... it's unlikely people will return to this and I don't see much historical value having it in the RFC rather than people looking it up in earlier versions of the drafts themselves.

Author: Sure
